---
marp: true
style: @import url('https://unpkg.com/tailwindcss@^2/dist/utilities.min.css');

---

# Quiz 4 Review
## Welcome back to CS 2100!
## Prof. Rasika Bhalerao

---

# Revisited topics

## Stakeholder-value matrices (revisited from Quiz 2)

- Selecting stakeholders
- Selecting values

## Correlation (revisited from Quiz 2)

- Definition of correlation
- Pearson's correlation coefficient

---

<div class="grid grid-cols-2 gap-4">
<div>

# New Quiz 4 Topics

## Coupling / cohesion / encapsulation

- Identifying / mitigating coupling between classes
- Identifying / mitigating lack of cohesion
- Enhancing encapsulation a class

## Iterator

- Iterable and Iterator protocols and interfaces

</div>
<div>

## Comparable

- Comparable protocol
- Checking for inconsistencies
- Rules for using `<`, `>`, etc.

## Recursion

- Tracing functions / identifying bugs
- Relative efficiency of functions

## Minimum Spanning Trees

- Definition of a MST
- Kruskal's Algorithm

</div>
</div>

---

# Cohesion / coupling / encapsulation

<div class="grid grid-cols-3 gap-4">
<div>

**Cohesion:** how closely related the parts of a unit are (good)
- Single Responsibility Principle: each unit should have exactly one responsibility
- Function: has a single, well-defined job
- Class: methods are very closely related

</div>
<div>

**Coupling:** how dependent separate units are (bad)
- Often, that means that one class is too dependent on another, and any changes to the other class will result in "ripple effects" on it.

</div>
<div>

**Encapsulation:** how hidden complex details are (good)
- shields clients from unnecessary implementation details
- gives us more flexibility to change implementations without telling the client

</div>
</div>

---

## Poll: Which ones lead to good cohesion?

1. Put all methods in one big class instead of several small classes
2. Make sure each variable represents exactly one piece of information
3. Use helper methods to split complex tasks into multiple simple tasks
4. Write code that runs efficiently

---

## Poll: How can we avoid coupling?

1. Make it so that changing a class's attributes doesn't require us to to update any code in another class
2. Don't use any built-in Python types
3. Make it so a class doesn't instantiate or control instances of another class
4. Write thorough tests

---

## Poll: Which ones improve encapsulation?

1. Using underscores in variable names to indicate they shouldn't be directly accessed
2. Using appropriate variable names (other than the underscores)
3. Using properties so we can control how attributes are modified
4. Writing thorough documentation

---

# Iterable / Iterator

|  | Iterable | Iterator |
| - | - | - |
| Protocol's required methods | `__iter__(self) -> Iterator[T]`: returns an iterator | `__next__(self) -> T`: returns the next element or raises `StopIteration` <br /> `__iter__(self) -> Iterator[T]` : returns itself |
| `abc` interface's required methods | `__iter__(self) -> Iterator[T]` (same as protocol) | `__next__(self) -> T` (same as protocol) <br /> not `__iter__(self) -> Iterator[T]` because it's aleady there |

---

## Exercise: let's write a class `Sarcasm`, which is like a `str`, but when we iterate over it, it capitalizes a random half of the letters

<style scoped>
section {
    font-size: 22px;
}
</style>

```python
import random
from collections.abc import Iterable, Iterator

class Sarcasm(Iterable[str]):
    def __init__(self, text: str):
        self.text = text
    
    def __iter__(self) -> Iterator[str]:
        return SarcasmIterator(self.text)

class SarcasmIterator(Iterator[str]):
    def __init__(self, text: str):
        self.remaining_text = text
    
    def __next__(self) -> str:
        if len(self.remaining_text) == 0:
            raise StopIteration
        next_char = self.remaining_text[0]
        next_char = next_char.lower() if random.randint(0, 1) == 0 else next_char.upper()
        self.remaining_text = self.remaining_text[1:]
        return next_char

print(''.join(letter for letter in Sarcasm('hi rasika')))
```

---

# Comparable

- `__eq__(self, other: object) -> bool`: equals `==`
- `__ne__(self, other: object) -> bool`: not equals `!=`
- `__lt__(self, other: object) -> bool`: less than `<`
- `__le__(self, other: object) -> bool`: less than or equal to `<=`
- `__gt__(self, other: object) -> bool`: greater than `>`
- `__ge__(self, other: object) -> bool`: greater than or equal to `>=`

#### Don't need all six (which is why there's no interface)
#### Common: Implement `__eq__()` and one ordering method like `__lt__()`

`a < b` calls `a.__lt__(b)` or `not a.__ge__(b)` or `not (a.__gt__(b) or a == b)`

---

## Poll: How can we check for inconsistencies between comparison methods?

1. If they use the same attributes for comparison, then they must be consistent.
2. If `__eq__()` says A is equal to B, and `__gt__()` says A is greater than B, then they are inconsistent.
3. If `__le__()` says A is less than or equal to B, and `__ge__()` says A is greater than or equal to B, then they are inconsistent.
4. If all six comparison methods are implemented, then they must be inconsistent.

---

# Recursion

<div class="grid grid-cols-2 gap-4">
<div>

## Structure:

- Base case(s)
  - Simplest version of the problem
  - E.g., 0, empty string, empty list
- Recursive case(s)
  - Do one step
    - E.g., process one number, print one character
  - Recursively call the function to do the rest of the steps

</div>
<div>

## Common bugs:

- Missing base case
  - Possibly one out of multiple required base cases
- In the recursive call, not moving "closer" to the base case

## Relative efficiency:

- Trace the recursive function. Count the number of times the function is called.

</div>
</div>

---

## Poll: How can we use a function decorator to make a recursive function more efficient?

1. Use `@classmethod` so the method operates on the class rather than the instance
2. Use `@property` so we can control how attributes are modified
3. Write a function decorator that stores the results of subproblems so they can be reused without being recalculated
4. Write a function decorator that prints the amount of time it took to run the function

Note: Function decorators will not be on the exam.

---

# Minimum Spanning Trees

##### Requirements of MST:
- Spans (connects) all nodes: can get from any station to any other station
- Tree (no cycles): should not be two separate routes from station A to station B
- Minimum sum of edge weights: cheapest way to build tracks to fit the other criteria

##### Kruskal's Algorithm selects edges from a weighted, undirected graph to build a MST:
1. Make each node the root of its own Union-Find Tree
2. Put all edges in a priority queue (ordered by weight)
3. While there are edges in the priority queue, and the tree is not spanning:
   1. Remove the edge `E` with the minimum weight from the priority queue
   2. If `find()` is different for `E`'s nodes, `union()` them and add `E` to the MST

---

## Poll: When can we stop iterating in Kruskal's algorithm?

1. When we find an edge that would cause a cycle
2. When each node is connected to at least one edge
3. When all nodes are connected to edges in a connected tree
4. When each node is the root of its own tree in union-find

---

# [Practice Quiz 4](https://github.com/neu-pdi/cs2100-public-resources/blob/main/src/pages/quizzes/Practice%20Quiz%204.pdf)

---

# Poll:

# 1. What is your main takeaway from today?

# 2. What would you like to revisit next time?