---
marp: true
style: @import url('https://unpkg.com/tailwindcss@^2/dist/utilities.min.css');

---

# Designing Programs with Inheritance
## Welcome back to CS 2100!
## Prof. Rasika Bhalerao

---

## Poll: What would be a good relationship between `Chair` and `Throne`?
1. `Throne` should be an interface implemented by `Chair`
2. `Chair` should be an interface implemented by `Throne`
3. `Throne` should be a concrete subclass of the abstract class `Chair`
4. `Chair` should be a concrete subclass of the abstract class `Throne`
5. None of the above

---

# Inheritance vs composition

### Inheritance: _is a_ relationship
- A square _is a_ rectangle.
- One of the classes is a subclass of the other.
- (One of the classes may be abstract, but neither should be an interface.)

### Composition: _has a_ relationship
- A square _has_ four edges.
- One of the classes holds an instance of the other class as an instance variable.

### Good object-oriented design requires knowing when to use inheritance versus composition.

---

## Example when to use composition (_has a_)

`SocialMedia`: a class that holds information about a social media platform, including a set of users
- Correct: composition. `SocialMedia` class has a `Set[User]` as an attribute
- Incorrect: inheritance. It would be wrong to make the `SocialMedia` class extend the `Set[User]` class
Both are possible to do using Python, but the inheritance version is silly:
```python
class SocialMedia(set[str]):
    pass

fb = SocialMedia()
fb.add('Mini')
fb.add('Binnie')

print(fb)  # SocialMedia({'Mini', 'Binnie'})
```

---

## Example when to use composition (_has a_)

A `House` with a kitchen and bedroom
- Correct: composition. The `House` class should have instance variables for a `Kitchen` and a `Bedroom`
- Incorrect: inheritance. It would be wrong to make the `House` class extend the `Kitchen` class and add the features of a `Bedroom` (like a `Bed` instance variable)

Again, both options are possible to do using Python, but the inheritance version would require admitting that one's house is a specific type of kitchen.

---

## Example when to use inheritance (_is a_)

`Cat`, `Lion`, and `HouseCat`:
- Correct: inheritance. The `Lion` and `HouseCat` classes should extend the `Cat` class
- Incorrect: composition. It would be wrong to make the `Lion` and `HouseCat` classes each have an instance variable for a `Cat` to which they outsource all of the kneading

---

## Poll: Which of these pairs of classes should use inheritance rather than composition?
1. `VideoGame` and `Physics`
2. `UIComponent` and `TextBox`
3. `Student` and `TA`
4. `OnlineStore` and `Inventory`
5. `TextEditor` and `SpellChecker`

---

<div class="grid grid-cols-2 gap-4">
<div>

```python
from abc import ABC, abstractmethod

class Pet(ABC):
    @abstractmethod
    def express_affection(self) -> None:
        pass

class Cat(Pet):
    def express_affection(self) -> None:
        self.make_biscuits()
    
    def make_biscuits(self) -> None:
        print('Making biscuits')

class Dog(Pet):
    def express_affection(self) -> None:
        self.slobber()
    
    def slobber(self) -> None:
        print('Slobbering')

for pet in [Cat(), Dog(), Cat()]:
    pet.express_affection()
```

</div>
<div>

# Polymorphism

This works because of _polymorphism_: the `pet` variable's ability to be both a `Cat` and a `Dog`, and for it to be treated correctly as an instance of both a `Cat` and a `Dog`.

</div>
</div>

---

# Polymorphism

Let's create classes for `Car`, `Motorcycle`, and `Truck`.

Let's write a function that takes a fleet of vehicles as a list and returns the total fuel needed for the trip.

---

<div class="grid grid-cols-2 gap-4">
<div>

```python
class Vehicle(ABC):
    def __init__(self, mpg: int):
        self.fuel_used: float = 0.0
        self.mpg = mpg
    
    def move(self, distance: int) -> None:
        self.fuel_used += (distance / self.mpg)

    def get_fuel(self) -> float:
        return self.fuel_used

class Car(Vehicle):
    def __init__(self) -> None:
        super().__init__(26)

class Motorcycle(Vehicle):
    def __init__(self) -> None:
        super().__init__(55)

class Truck(Vehicle):
    def __init__(self) -> None:
        super().__init__(7)
```

</div>
<div>


```python
def get_total_gas(fleet: List[Vehicle]) -> float:
    return sum(veh.get_fuel() for veh in fleet)

fleet: List[Vehicle] = [
    Car(),
    Car(),
    Truck(),
    Motorcycle(),
    Motorcycle(),
    Motorcycle(),
    Motorcycle()
]

for veh in fleet: veh.move(10)

print(get_total_gas(fleet))
```

</div>
</div>

---

# Design principle: Encapsulation

- Group attributes and methods into a single class.
- Information hiding: discourage direct access to some methods / attributes (using underscores).
  - Protects internal data from unauthorized modification
  - Promotes "modularity" by hiding unnecessary implementation details behind a simple public interface
  - Gives us more flexibility to change implementations without telling the client

---

## Poll: Which class design best demonstrates encapsulation?
1. Expose all internal attributes to the public for flexibility
2. Create a minimal public interface with all complex logic kept private
3. Rather than having a class be a direct subclass of its interface, make it a subclass of a subclass, to add layers of privacy
4. Document internal methods thoroughly for users

---

## Poll: Here is a poorly designed Python class:
```python
class Rectangle:
    def __init__(self, width: int, height: int):
        self.width = width
        self.height = height
        self.area = width * height
```
## How can we improve its encapsulation?
1. Validate in `__init__()` that `width` and `height` are not negative
2. Make all three attributes private with corresponding getter and setter methods using the `@property` decorator
3. Make `width` and `height` private with corresponding getter/setter `@property` methods, and make `area` a property only (calculated in a getter method)
4. Add docstrings to explain the attributes

---

## Poll: Here is a poorly designed Python class:
```python
class Rectangle:
    def __init__(self, width: int, height: int):
        self.width = width
        self.height = height
        self.area = width * height
```
## How should errors be handled in an encapsulated class design?
1. Raise all errors to the caller
2. Wrap all errors in `try` / `except` and return error codes instead
3. Wrap low-level internal errors in `try` / `except` and raise them as domain-specific errors
4. Log errors internally but never raise them

---

# Design principle: Coupling vs cohesion

**Cohesion:** how closely related the parts of a unit are
- closely related to the Single Responsibility Principle
- Example where the unit is a function: aim for it to have a single, well-defined job
- Example where the unit is a class: aim for its methods to be very closely related

**Coupling:** how dependent different units are on each other
- want to **avoid** this
- Often, that means that one class is too dependent on another, and any changes to the other class will result in "ripple effects" on it.

---

<div class="grid grid-cols-2 gap-4">
<div>

## Bad email sender with too much coupling of its tasks:

```python
class BadEmailSender:
    def send_email(self, 
            user: str, email_type_flag: int
    ) -> None:
        if email_type_flag == 1:
            # send a welcome email
        elif email_type_flag == 2:
            # send a password reset email
```

- Many tasks, all very dependent on each other
- Code will be repeated between branches

</div>
<div>

## Better design that uses polymorphism to separate out the tasks into cohesive classes:
```python
class Template(ABC):
    @abstractmethod
    def generate_content(self, user: str) -> str:
        pass

class EmailSender:
    def send_email(self,
            email_template: Template, user: str
    ) -> str:
        return email_template.generate_content(user)

class WelcomeEmail(Template):
    def generate_content(self, user: str) -> str:
        return f"Welcome {user}!"

class PasswordResetEmail(Template):
    def generate_content(self, user: str) -> str:
        return f"Reset password for {user}"
```

</div>
</div>

---

# Poll:

# 1. What is your main takeaway from today?

# 2. What would you like to revisit next time?